---
layout: post
title: Blind3y3Design 3.0
date: 2015-08-07 20:00:00 -0400
categories: [blog, work]
tags: [Design, Development, blind3y3design]
---

## Welcome to the new Blind3y3Design!

"3.0? What happened to 2.0?" you say? Here's the deal; after about 4 months of this site being on vanilla Jekyll I decided to switch over to using Octopress. It was great and I didn't have to change much to get it working. The one thing that kept nagging at me was the design. The layout and design of octopress is generally a good layout. Unfortunately as a developer I like to tinker with things and tweak pretty much everything constantly. This meant editing or overriding pretty much everythign about octopress' design. 

Over the last year and a half I have worked on a large and varied array of projects, as a results I've learned a number of new techniques and tools. One of these in particular is I've developed my own SMACSS/BEM based Sass naming conventions, even building a framework with it at one point. Now because of this it pains me when I have ot overwrite or use another convention. Along with the naming convention is an organizational folder structure to keep me sane when working on larger projects. I like to split my Sass files up in to folders describing their general purpose. 

<p data-pullquote="I didn't see the need for a CMS, I'm comfortable in my editor and command line, I don't need an admin panel."></p>
The reasons mentioned above, and a handfull of others; such as extreme comfort in the command line, have led me back to vanilla Jekyll. I've looked at tools like [Grav][grav] and [Kirby][kirby], and they're both great tools, but for Blind3y3Design I felt I didn't need to use such a large tool. If I were building a client site or working on a project with more than just myself I'd pick something like Kirby in a hearbeat; but as a simple personal site, I didn't see the need for a CMS, I'm comfortable in my editor and command line, I don't need an admin panel. 

So here we are, I've got a nice simple layout based on [Poole][poole] by [@mdo][mdo]. It's perfect for me to customize and tinker with as I like. I'm also much more comfortable with the command line, liquid templates, and ruby than I was 2 years ago. I look forward to how this site elvolves and changes in the coming months as my comformt with new web technologies grows and I can build modules on top of Jekyll. Thanks for sticking with me.

As always, keep building better.

[grav]: http://getgrav.org/    "Grav CMS"
[kirby]: http://getkirby.com/  "Kirby CMS"
[poole]: http://getpoole.com/  "Poole Jekyll Theme"
[mdo]: http://markdotto.com/   "Mark Otto"